OpenTelemetry Instrumentation (#719)
kyma-project/community: concepts/observability-strategy/configurable-tracing/pocs/instrumentation/README.md

# OpenTelemetry Collector Performance

> The measured numbers that generated using version 0.60.0 of the OpenTelemetry Collector, are primarily applicable to the OpenTelemetry Collector and measured only for traces. In the future, more configurations should be tested.

Author: No, changes are fine

It is important to know, that the performance of the OpenTelemetry Collector depends on a set of factors including:

- CPU / Memory allocation

> - The type of sampling: Tail based or head based sampling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The type of sampling: Tail-based or head-based sampling
```

- The receiving format: OpenTelemetry, Jaeger thrift or Zipkin
- The size of spans

> Please note, with OpenTelemetry agent expected better performance with lower resource utilization, since the OpenTelemetry Agent does not support features such as batching or retries and no tail based sampling supported yet.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understood the meaning of this sentence. Please correct me if I misunderstood the meaning.

```suggestion
With OpenTelemetry agent, better performance with lower resource utilization is expected, because the OpenTelemetry agent does not support features such as batching, retries, or tail-based sampling.
```

Author: No, sentence has still correct meaning

# Testing

> Test was performed on Kyma version 2.6 deployed on Kubernetes version 1.23.9 using the [Synthetic Load Generator utility](https://github.com/Omnition/synthetic-load-generator) running for a minumum of one hour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test was performed on Kyma version 2.6 deployed on Kubernetes version 1.23.9 using the [Synthetic Load Generator utility](https://github.com/Omnition/synthetic-load-generator) running for a minumum of one hour.
```

Test results are reproducible by using the parameters described in this document. It is important to know that this utility has a few configurable parameters, which can impact the result of the tests.
The parameters used in this test are:

- flushIntervalMillis: 1000
- MaxQueueSize: 100
- Submission rate: 100000 span/sec

OpenTelemetry Collector:
- 1 CPU
- 2 GiB Memory
- Processor memory limiter: 1000 Mib with a spike limit 256 Mib, and an interval check of one second.

Test goal is, find a maximum sustained rate with given default configuration and allocated resources (CPU and Memory).

> Test setup in total reach 3248176 (900 traces/sec.) traces with total 162408800 (45K span/sec.) spans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test setup in total reaches 3248176 traces (900 traces/sec.) with total 162408800 spans (45K span/sec.).
```

| ![CPU Utilization](assets/cpu.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 1 CPU utilization |

| ![MemoryUtilization](assets/memory.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 2 Memory utilization |

| ![Receive Bandwidth](assets/receive_bandwidth.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 3 Receive Bandwidth |

| ![Transmit Bandwidth](assets/transmit_bandwidth.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 4 Transmit Bandwidth |

| ![Rate of Received Packets](assets/receive_rate.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 5 Rate of Received Packets |

| ![Rate of Transmitted Packets](assets/transmit_rate.jpg) |
| :--: |
| Fig. 6 Rate of Transmitted Packets |

> With using head based sampling, when higher rates needed, either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use head-based sampling and need higher rates, you can do the following:
```

> - Divide traffic to different collector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Divide traffic to different collector.
```

> - Scale-up by adding more CPU/Memory resources (doubling CPU and Memory will result two time more rate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scale up by adding more CPU and memory resources; for example, to double the rate, double CPU and memory.
```

> - Scale-out by adding one or more collector behind a load balancer or a Kubernetes service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scale out by adding one or more collectors behind a load balancer or a Kubernetes service.
```

> With tail based sampling either:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use tail-based sampling and need higher rates, you can do the following:
```

> - Scale-up by adding more CPU/Memory resources (doubling CPU and Memory will result two time more rate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scale up by adding more CPU and memory resources; for example, to double the rate, double CPU and memory.
```

> - Scale-out by adding one or more collector behind a load balancer or a Kubernetes service, but the load balancer have to support **traceID-based** routing because all span of a given traceID need to be received by the dame collector instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scale out by adding one or more collectors behind a load balancer or a Kubernetes service. The load balancer must support traceID-based routing, because all spans of a given traceID must be received by the dame collector instance.
```

What is a dame collector? Is this a typo?

Author: sorry, it should be "same collector"

Reviewer: That makes a lot more sense, thank you! :D

## Queue Test

> The OpenTelemetry pipelines offers a set of queue and retry mechanism, in case of backend outages. 

Reviewer: Either singular ...

```suggestion
To mitigate backend outages, the OpenTelemetry pipeline offers a set of queue and retry mechanisms.
```

...or plural

```suggestion
To mitigate backend outages, the OpenTelemetry pipelines offer a set of queue and retry mechanisms.
```

> The queue mechanism consist on two stages, first one is on the processor level in this case **Batch Processor**, 

Reviewer: Trying to restructure all the information about the batch processor.

```suggestion
The queue mechanism consists of two stages, one on processor level and one on exporter level.

In this case, on processor level, we use the **batch processor**. The batch processor queue is a pretty simple in-memory queue. It queues spans received from any receiver before they are processed.

The batch processor supports both size- and time-based batching. Batching supports better data compression and reduces the number of outgoing connections required to transmit the data.

You can configure the batch processor queue with the following configuration parameters:

```

> the batch processor queue is pretty simple and will queue **spans** received from any receiver before processed. This processor support both size and time based batching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The batch processor queue is an only in-memory queue and offers the following configuration possibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **send_batch_size**: Number of spans, which a batch will be sent regardless of the timeout.

Reviewer: Not sure if I understood this correctly. Please make sure this is correct. 

```suggestion
- **send_batch_size**: Number of spans that a batch receives, regardless of the timeout.
```

Author: Maybe something like "Number of spans that a single batch can contain, regardless of the timeout."

Reviewer: Nice, that sounds much better!

> - **timeout**: Time duration after which a batch will be sent regardless of size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **timeout**: Time duration after which a batch is sent, regardless of size.
```

> - **send_batch_max_size**: The upper limit of the batch size. This setting ensures that large batches are split into smaller units and it must be greater or equal to **send_batch_size**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **send_batch_max_size**: The upper limit of the batch size. This setting ensures that large batches are split into smaller units. It must be greater or equal to **send_batch_size**.
```

> Batching helps better compress the data and reduce the number of outgoing connections required to transmit the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The second kind of queue is on the exporter level and primarily offers queued retries. This queue support also persistent queue mechanism but this is not part of the test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second kind of queue is on the exporter level and primarily offers queued retries. This queue also supports a persistent queue mechanism, but this is not part of the test.
```

> The exporter queue, queues batches which received from batch processor and will push batches to the backed after a configured timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exporter queue queues batches that it receives from the batch processor, and pushes batches to the backed after a configured timeout.
```

In case of backend outages, there is a retry mechanism to retry export to the backend before batches dropped from the queue. 

> That retry mechanism offers following configuration possibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the retry mechanism with the following configuration parameters:
```

- **initial_interval**: Time to wait after the first failure before retrying (default 5 seconds).
- **max_interval**: The upper bound of backoff (default 30 seconds).
- **max_elapsed_time**: The maximum amount of time spent trying to send a batch (default 300 seconds).

> The test goals is, simulate a backend outages and find out a configuration at least can 10 minutes long tolerate outages before drop traces from the queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test goals is to simulate backend outages and find out a configuration that tolerates outages of 10 minutes (or longer) before it drops traces from the queue.
```

> The test was performed on a Kyma version 2.6 deployed on Kubernetes version 1.23.9 using the [Synthetic Load Generator utility](https://github.com/Omnition/synthetic-load-generator) running for a minimum of 15 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test was performed on Kyma version 2.6 deployed on Kubernetes version 1.23.9 using the [Synthetic Load Generator utility](https://github.com/Omnition/synthetic-load-generator) running for a minimum of 15 minutes.
```

consistency with line 16

The parameters used in this test are:

- flushIntervalMillis: 1000
- MaxQueueSize: 100
- Submission rate: 5000 span/sec

OpenTelemetry Collector:
- 1 CPU

> - 2 GiB Memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2 GiB memory
```

> - The Processor memory limiter disabled to avoid any data losses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Processor memory limiter disabled to avoid data losses.
```

> - The Batch processor queue size configured to 10000 spans and 10 second timeout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Batch processor queue size configured to 10000 spans and 10 second timeout.
```

> - The exporter queue size configured to 600 batches and max elapsed time to 600 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Exporter queue size configured to 600 batches and max elapsed time to 600 seconds.
```

> Test executed approximately 15 minutes, during test execution 61285 (in average 100 traces/second) traces generated and sent to the collector, in total 3064250 spans (in average 5000 spans/second). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test was executed for approximately 15 minutes. During test execution, 61285 traces (in average 100 traces/second) were generated and sent to the collector; in total 3064250 spans (in average 5000 spans/second). 
```

> All the traces and spans arrived to the collector pipelines and processed without successfully pushed to the backend.

Reviewer: Did I understand this correctly? 

```suggestion
All the traces and spans arrived at the collector pipelines and were processed without being successfully pushed to the backend.
```

Author: correct

> The collector deployment memory arrive his peak after approximately after 10 minutes (see Figure 8) and start with dropping data from the queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The collector deployment memory peaked after approximately 10 minutes (see Figure 8) and started dropping data from the queue.
```

> The CPU utilization stay moderate during entire test execution (see Figure 7).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CPU utilization stayed moderate during the entire test execution (see Figure 7).
```
